Dizziness and vertigo - aftercare: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia
Skip navigation
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government
organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to
the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official,
secure websites.
National Library of Medicine
The navigation menu has been collapsed.
Menu
Health Topics
Drugs & Supplements
Genetics
Medical Tests
Medical Encyclopedia
About MedlinePlus
Show
Search
Search MedlinePlus
GO
About MedlinePlus
What's New
Site Map
Customer Support
Health Topics
Drugs & Supplements
Genetics
Medical Tests
Medical Encyclopedia
Español
You Are Here:
Home
→
Medical Encyclopedia
→
Dizziness and vertigo - aftercare
URL of this page: //medlineplus.gov/ency/patientinstructions/000692.htm
Dizziness and vertigo - aftercare
Dizziness
is a word used by people to describe a variety of symptoms. You may feel lightheaded, woozy, unsteady, or like you might faint.
Dizziness can also describe the feeling that you are spinning or moving, or you feel like the world is spinning around you. This is called vertigo.
The feeling of spinning:
Often starts suddenly
Is usually started by moving the head
Lasts a few seconds to minutes
This article is about self-care for vertigo.
What to Expect
Most often, people say the spinning feeling can start when they roll over in bed or tilt their head up to look at something.
Along with dizziness and vertigo, you may also have:
Nausea and vomiting
Hearing loss
Ringing in your ears
(tinnitus)
Vision problems
, such as a feeling that things are jumping or moving
Loss of balance, difficulty standing up
Mild dizziness usually gets better by itself, or is easily treated. However, it can be a symptom of other problems. There are many causes. Medicines may cause dizziness, or problems with your inner ear. Motion sickness can also make you dizzy.
Vertigo can be a symptom of many disorders, as well. Some may be chronic, long-term conditions. Some may come and go. Depending on the cause of your vertigo, you may have other symptoms, like
benign positional vertigo
or
Meniere disease
. It is important to have your health care provider decide if your vertigo is a sign of a serious problem.
Self-care
If you have vertigo, you may be able to prevent your symptoms from getting worse by:
Avoiding sudden movements or position changes, especially of your head
Keeping still and resting when you have symptoms
Avoiding bright lights, TV, and reading when you have symptoms
When you feel better, slowly increase your activity. If you lose your balance, you may need help walking to stay safe.
A sudden, dizzy spell during certain activities can be dangerous. Wait one week after a severe spell of vertigo is gone before you climb, drive, or operate heavy machinery or consult your provider for advice. Chronic dizziness or vertigo can cause stress. Make healthy lifestyle choices to help you cope:
Get enough sleep.
Eat a well-balanced, healthy diet. Do not overeat.
Exercise regularly, if possible.
Learn and practice ways to relax, such as guided imagery, progressive muscle relaxation, yoga, tai chi, or meditation.
Keep a diary to record when you have dizziness, and what you were doing when it started. This may help identify triggers to avoid.
Home Safety
Make your home as safe as you can, just in case you lose your balance. For example:
Remove loose wires or cords from areas you walk through to get from one room to another.
Remove loose throw rugs.
Install night lights.
Put nonskid mats and grab bars near the bathtub and toilet.
Medicines
Your provider may prescribe medicines for nausea and vomiting. Dizziness and vertigo may improve with some medicines. Commonly used medicines include:
Dimenhydrinate
Meclizine
Sedatives such as diazepam (Valium)
Too much water or fluid in your body may make the symptoms worse by increasing fluid pressure in your inner ear. Your provider may suggest a low salt diet or water pills (diuretics).
When to Call the Doctor
Call 911 or the local emergency number, or go to an emergency room if you are dizzy and have:
A history of prior stroke
A head injury
Fever over 101°F (38.3°C)
Headache or a very stiff neck
Seizures
Trouble keeping fluids down; vomiting that does not stop
Chest pain
Irregular heart beat
Shortness of breath
Weakness
Cannot move an arm or leg
Change in vision or speech
Fainting and losing alertness
Contact your provider if you have:
New symptoms, or symptoms that are getting worse
Dizziness after taking medicine
Hearing loss
Alternative Names
Meniere disease - aftercare; Benign positional vertigo - aftercare
Images
Vertigo
References
Baloh RW, Jen JC. Hearing and equilibrium. In: Goldman L, Cooney KA, eds.
Goldman-Cecil Medicine
. 27th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2024:chap 396.
Chang AK. Dizziness and vertigo. In: Walls RM, ed.
Rosen's Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice
. 10th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 15.
Crane BT, Minor LB. Peripheral vestibular disorders. In: Flint PW, Francis HW, Haughey BH, et al, eds.
Cummings Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery
. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2021:chap 167.
Review Date 7/17/2025
Updated by: Joseph V. Campellone, MD, Department of Neurology, Cooper Medical School at Rowan University, Camden, NJ. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network. Also reviewed by David C. Dugdale, MD, Medical Director, Brenda Conaway, Editorial Director, and the A.D.A.M. Editorial team.
Learn how to cite this page
Related MedlinePlus Health Topics
Dizziness and Vertigo
Browse the Encyclopedia
Health Content Provider
06/01/2028
A.D.A.M., Inc. is accredited by URAC
, for Health Content Provider (www.urac.org). URAC's
accreditation program
is an independent audit to verify that A.D.A.M. follows rigorous standards of quality and accountability. A.D.A.M. is among the first to achieve this important distinction for online health information and services. Learn more about A.D.A.M.'s
editorial policy, editorial process
, and
privacy policy
.
The information provided herein should not be used during any medical emergency or for the diagnosis or treatment of any medical condition. A licensed medical professional should be consulted for diagnosis and treatment of any and all medical conditions. Links to other sites are provided for information only -- they do not constitute endorsements of those other sites. No warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied, is made as to the accuracy, reliability, timeliness, or correctness of any translations made by a third-party service of the information provided herein into any other language.
© 1997- 2026 A.D.A.M., a business unit of Ebix, Inc. Any duplication or distribution of the information contained herein is strictly prohibited.
All content on this site including text, images, graphics, audio, video, data, metadata, and compilations is protected by copyright and other intellectual property laws. You may view the content for personal, noncommercial use. Any other use requires prior written consent from Ebix. You may not copy, reproduce, distribute, transmit, display, publish, reverse-engineer, adapt, modify, store beyond ordinary browser caching, index, mine, scrape, or create derivative works from this content. You may not use automated tools to access or extract content, including to create embeddings, vectors, datasets, or indexes for retrieval systems. Use of any content for training, fine-tuning, calibrating, testing, evaluating, or improving AI systems of any kind is prohibited without express written consent. This includes large language models, machine learning models, neural networks, generative systems, retrieval-augmented systems, and any software that ingests content to produce outputs. Any unauthorized use of the content including AI-related use is a violation of our rights and may result in legal action, damages, and statutory penalties to the fullest extent permitted by law. Ebix reserves the right to enforce its rights through legal, technological, and contractual measures.
About MedlinePlus
What's New
Site Map
Customer Support
Subscribe to RSS
Connect with NLM
NLM Web Policies
Copyright
Accessibility
Guidelines for Links
Viewers & Players
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs
For Developers
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
National Institutes of Health