NICHD-NIMH Workshop: Impact of Technology and Digital Media on Child and Adolescent Development and Mental Health - National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Due to current HHS and NIH restructuring, some content on nimh.nih.gov is not being updated regularly. Please refer to
clinicaltrials.gov
and
nih.gov
for up-to-date information on NIH research.
In Crisis? Call or Text 988
Transforming the understanding
and treatment of mental illnesses.
Home
|
Help for Mental Illnesses
Search the NIMH website:
Información en español
Mental Health Information
Get Involved
Research
Funding
News & Events
About Us
Health Topics
NIMH offers expert-reviewed information on mental disorders and a range of topics.
Statistics
NIMH statistics pages include statistics on the prevalence, treatment, and costs of mental illness for the population of the United States.
Brochures and Fact Sheets
Download, read, and order free NIMH brochures and fact sheets about mental disorders and related topics.
Help for Mental Illnesses
If you or someone you know has a mental illness, there are ways to get help. Use these resources to find help for yourself, a friend, or a family member.
Clinical Trials
If you or a friend or family member are thinking about taking part in clinical research, this page contains basic information about clinical trials.
Stakeholder Engagement
Find out how NIMH engages a range of stakeholder organizations as part of its efforts to ensure the greatest public health impact of the research we support.
Connect with NIMH
Learn more about NIMH newsletters, public participation in grant reviews, research funding, clinical trials, the NIMH Gift Fund, and connecting with NIMH on social media.
Digital Shareables
Use these free education and outreach materials in your community and on social media to spread the word about mental health and related topics.
Science Education
Use these free digital, outreach materials in your community and on social media to spread the word about mental health.
Research Funded by NIMH
NIMH supports research at universities, medical centers, and other institutions via grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements. Learn more about NIMH research areas, policies, resources, and initiatives.
Research Conducted at NIMH (Intramural Research Program)
The Division of Intramural Research Programs (IRP) is the internal research division of the NIMH. Over 40 research groups conduct basic neuroscience research and clinical investigations of mental illnesses, brain function, and behavior at the NIH campus in Bethesda, Maryland. Learn more about research conducted at NIMH.
Priority Research Areas
Learn about NIMH priority areas for research and funding that have the potential to improve mental health care over the short, medium, and long term.
Resources for Researchers
Information about resources such as data, tissue, model organisms and imaging resources to support the NIMH research community.
Opportunities & Announcements
Find all NIMH and cross-NIH funding opportunities.
Funding Strategy for Grants
Read more about the NIMH Strategic Plan for Research, Strategic Research Priorities, the anatomy of NIMH funding, and our yearly funding strategy for research grants.
Application Process
Explore the NIMH grant application process, including how to write your grant, how to submit your grant, and how the review process works.
Managing Grants
Learn about how NIMH manages research grants, including policies and reporting requirements.
Clinical Research
Find the latest NIH and NIMH policies, guidance, and resources for clinical research.
Training
Explore NIMH research training and career development opportunities.
Small Business Research
Learn about funding opportunities for small businesses.
Quick Links
Funding & Grant News
Support for Clinical Trials at NIMH
Science Updates
List of NIMH science updates including press releases, research highlights, and institute announcements.
Meetings and Events
Details about upcoming events—including meetings, conferences, workshops, lectures, webinars, and chats—sponsored by NIMH.
Multimedia
NIMH videos and podcasts featuring science news, lecture series, meetings, seminars, and special events.
Innovation Speaker Series
An annual lecture series dedicated to innovation, invention, and scientific discovery.
About the Acting NIMH Director
Learn more about the Acting Director of the NIMH, Shelli Avenevoli, Ph.D.
Advisory Boards and Groups
Read about the boards and groups that advise and provide guidance to the Institute.
Strategic Plan
Learn more about NIMH's roadmap for the Institute’s research priorities over the next five years.
Offices and Divisions
Learn more about the functions of each NIMH office and division.
Budget
Read the annual NIMH Congressional Justifications.
Careers at NIMH
Search for jobs, including scientific, administrative and executive careers at NIMH.
Staff Directories
Find the names, telephone numbers, email addresses, and office locations of NIMH staff.
History
Explore key milestones, discoveries, and the impact of NIMH-funded studies on mental health.
Getting to NIMH
Find directions, maps, parking information, and other visitor information for NIMH.
Quick Links
Contribute to Mental Health Research
Mental Health Information
Mental Health Information Home
Health Topics
Statistics
Brochures and Fact Sheets
Help for Mental Illnesses
Clinical Trials
Get Involved
Get Involved Home
Stakeholder Engagement
Connect with NIMH
Digital Shareables
Science Education
Research
Research Home
Research Funded by NIMH
Research Conducted at NIMH (Intramural Research Program)
Funding
Funding Home
Opportunities & Announcements
Strategy for Research Grants
Grant Writing & Approval Process
Managing Grants
Clinical Research
Research Training and Career Development Opportunities
Small Business Research
News & Events
News & Events Home
Science Updates
Meetings and Events
Multimedia
Social Media
Email Updates
Innovation Speaker Series
About Us
About Us Home
About the Acting NIMH Director
Advisory Boards and Groups
Strategic Plan
Offices and Divisions
Budget
Careers at NIMH
Staff Directories
History
Getting to NIMH
Science Updates
Meetings and Events
Multimedia
Innovation Speaker Series
Home
>
News & Events
>
Meetings and Events
>
Past Events from 2024
>
NICHD-NIMH Workshop: Impact of Technology and Digital Media on Child and Adolescent Development and Mental Health
Share Page
Menu
Past Events by Year
2026
2025
2024
Past Events by Topic
Health Topics
Bipolar Disorder
Depression
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder
HIV/AIDS
Psychosis
Schizophrenia
Suicide
Traumatic Events
Populations
Children and Adolescents
Global Mental Health
Research
BRAIN Initiative
Basic Research
Brain Anatomy and Physiology
Clinical Research and Trials
Genetics
Health Disparities
Mental Health Services Research
Prevention
RDoC
Research Funding
Training
Treatments
NICHD-NIMH Workshop: Impact of Technology and Digital Media on Child and Adolescent Development and Mental Health
Date
April 4–5, 2024
Location
Virtual and in person at the Neuroscience Center Building (6001 Executive Boulevard Rockville, MD)
Overview
The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD)
and
the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
hosted a workshop on the impact of technology and digital media on child and adolescent development and mental health. The goal of this meeting was to discuss the current state of and future directions for research on the positive and negative effects of technology and digital media (TDM) on the development and mental health outcomes of infants, children, and adolescents. The program includes experts in TDM, early development, childhood and adolescence, and physical and mental health and will include individual talks and panel discussions. The meeting was open to the scientific community and the public.
Read the executive summary for this workshop
.
Recordings
Day 1: April 4, 2024
Watch the NIH Videocast Recording
:
https://videocast.nih.gov/watch=54538
The videocast location timestamp is noted by the session titles.
Welcome and Opening Remarks
Welcome by Workshop Co-Chairs (00:00)
James Griffin, Ph.D., Chief, Child Development and Behavior Branch, NICHD
Julia Zehr, Ph.D., Chief, Developmental Mechanisms and Trajectories of Psychopathology Branch, NIMH
Opening Remarks
Alison Cernich, Ph.D., Deputy Director, NICHD (07:01) and (20:21)
Senator Edward Markey, M.A. (video remarks) (11:57)
Congressman Jamie Raskin, M.D. (video remarks) (14:59)
Session I: The Influence of TDM on Cognitive Development
(21:30)
Moderator: Virginia Salo, Ph.D., Program Director, Child Development and Behavior Branch, NICHD, (21:56)
Shayl Griffith, Ph.D., clinical psychologist and Assistant Professor in the Department of Counseling, Recreation, and School Psychology, Florida International University (22:44)
Ying Xu, Ph.D., Assistant Professor of Learning Sciences and Technology, University of Michigan (33:47)
Eva Telzer, Ph.D., Professor of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of North Carolina Chapel Hill (46:21)
Discussant: Rachel Barr, Ph.D., Professor of Psychology and Director of the Early Learning Project, Georgetown University (1:01:24)
Moderated Discussion (1:15:07)
Break
Session II: The Influence of TDM on Physical Health and Health Behaviors
(1:53:00)
Moderator: Brett Miller, Ph.D., Deputy Chief of the Child Development and Behavior Branch and Director of the Literacy and Related Learning Disabilities Program, NICHD, (1:53:05)
Alison Ventura, Ph.D., Professor of Kinesiology and Public Health, California Polytechnic State University (1:54:02)
Megan Moreno, M.D., MSEd, M.P.H., Professor of Pediatrics and adjunct Professor of Educational Psychology University of Wisconsin-Madison (2:09:40)
Anne-Marie Chang, Ph.D., Associate Professor of Biobehavioral Health and directs the Sleep and Human Health Laboratory, Pennsylvania State University (2:18:02)
Discussant: Jason Nagata, M.D., M.Sc.., is an Associate Professor of Pediatrics, the University of California, San Francisco (2:31:44)
Moderated Discussion (2:51:11)
Lunch
Session III: The Influence of TDM on Socioemotional Development and Mental Health
(3:12:57)
Moderator: Ashley Smith, Ph.D., Program Officer, Developmental Mechanisms and Trajectories of Psychopathology Branch, NIMH (3:13:35)
Sarah Coyne, Ph.D., Professor of Human Development in the School of Family Life, University, Brigham Young University (3:15:15)
Henry Willis, Ph.D., Assistant Professor, Department of Psychology, University of Maryland, College Park (3:28:07)
Sameer Hinduja, Ph.D., Professor in the School of Criminology and Criminal Justice, Florida Atlantic University (3:41:49)
Discussant: Lucia Magis-Weinberg, M.D., Ph.D., Assistant Professor in Psychology, University of Washington (3:56:52)
Moderated Discussion (4:13:27)
Break
Session IV: Panel Discussion - Addressing the Need for Greater Diversity and Inclusion in TDM Research
(4:33:47)
Moderator: Laura Thomas, Ph.D., Program Officer, Developmental Mechanisms and Trajectories of Psychopathology Branch, NIMH (4:34:09)
César Escobar-Viera, M.D., Ph.D., Assistant Professor of Psychiatry and Director of the Program for Internet Delivered Interventions on LGBTQA+ Mental Health (PRIDE iM), University of Pittsburgh, Chair (4:36:32)
Keith Hampton, Ph.D., Professor, Department of Media and Information and Interim Director of the Quello Center for Telecommunication Management and Law, Michigan State University(4:45:28)
Mimi Ito, Ph.D., Director of the Connected Learning Lab and John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Chair in Digital Media and Learning, University of California, Irvine (4:52:24)
Cindy Liu, Ph.D., Assistant Professor at Harvard Medical School, the Director of the Developmental Risk and Cultural Resilience Program within the Departments of Pediatrics and Psychiatry at Brigham and Women’s Hospital (5:02:50)
Robin Stevens, Ph.D., M.P.H., Associate Professor of Communication at the Annenberg School for Communication, and the Director of the Health Equity & Media Lab, University of Southern California (5:12:30)
Darcy Thompson, M.D., M.P.H., Professor of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine (5:21:11)
Discussion (5:30:09)
Day 1 Wrap-Up (6:03:11)
James Griffin, Ph.D., Chief, Child Development and Behavior Branch, NICHD
Julia Zehr, Ph.D., Chief, Developmental Mechanisms and Trajectories of Psychopathology Branch, NIMH
Day 1 Closing Remarks (6:03:55)
Rosalind King, Ph.D., Chief, Scientific Development and Coordination Section, Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences Research, National Institutes of Health
Adjourn for Day
Day 2: April 5, 2024
Watch the NIH Videocast Recording:
https://videocast.nih.gov/watch=54549
The videocast location timestamp is noted by the session titles.
Welcome and Opening Remarks (00:00)
Welcome by Workshop Co-Chairs
James Griffin, Ph.D., Chief, Child Development and Behavior Branch, NICHD (00:18)
Julia Zehr, Ph.D., Chief, Developmental Mechanisms and Trajectories of Psychopathology Branch, NIMH (03:05)
Opening Remarks
Shelli Avenevoli, Ph.D., Deputy Director, NIMH (04:18)
Diana Bianchi, M.D., Director, NICHD (08:25)
Kristen Busch, Policy Advisor, White House Office of Science and Technology Policy (12:09)
Session V: Panel Discussion - Assessing the Short- and Long-Term Effects of TDM: Conceptual and Measurement Issues
(19:45)
Moderator: Julia Zehr, Ph.D., Chief, Developmental Mechanisms and Trajectories of Psychopathology Branch, NIMH (19:50)
Jason Chein, Ph.D., Professor of Psychology and Neuroscience, Temple University, Chair (20:45)
Munmun De Choudhury, Ph.D., Associate Professor at the School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology (21:47)
John Hutton, M.D. M.S., F.A.A.P., Associate Professor in the Division of General and Community Pediatrics, UT Southwestern, Dallas, and adjunct Associate Professor of Pediatrics at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital (27:43)
Heather Kirkorian, Ph.D., Professor of Human Development and Family Studies, University of Wisconsin-Madison (34:52)
Laura Marciano, Ph.D., Research Associate at the Harvard Chan T.H. School of Public Health, Department of Social and Behavioral Science, the Kum Sheung Center for Health and Happiness, Harvard University (39:19)
Jenette E. Moreno, Ph.D., M.A., F.S.B.M., Assistant Professor at the Children’s Nutrition Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine (49:02)
Tiera Tanksley, Ph.D., Faculty Fellow in Critical Race Technology Studies, University of California, Los Angeles (57:15)
Discussion (1:04:10)
Break
Session VI: Panel Discussion - Current Knowledge Gaps and Future Directions in TDM Research
(1:33:12)
Moderator: James Griffin, Ph.D., Chief, Child Development and Behavior Branch, NICHD (1:33:12)
Jason Nagata, M.D., M.Sc.., is an Associate Professor of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco (1:35:37)
Lucia Magis-Weinberg, M.D., Ph.D., Assistant Professor in Psychology, University of Washington (1:43:03)
César Escobar-Viera, M.D., Ph.D., Assistant Professor of Psychiatry and Director of the Program for Internet Delivered Interventions on LGBTQA+ Mental Health (PRIDE iM), University of Pittsburgh, Chair (1:53:06)
Jason Chein, Ph.D., Professor of Psychology and Neuroscience, Temple University, Chair (1:59:45)
Rachel Barr, Ph.D., Professor of Psychology and Director of the Early Learning Project, Georgetown University (2:09:10)
Nicholas Allen, Ph.D., Ann Swindells Professor of Clinical Psychology, University of Oregon, Co-Chair (2:17:51)
Brendesha Tynes, Ph.D., Dean's Professor of Educational Equity and Professor of Education and Psychology at the USC Rossier School of Education, University of Southern California, Co-Chair (2:26:52)
Discussion (2:32:06)
Working Lunch – Breakout Groups: Future Directions in TDM Research
Report Out and Discussion (2:57:32)
Concluding Remarks
Julia Zehr, Ph.D., Chief, Developmental Mechanisms and Trajectories of Psychopathology Branch, NIMH (3:11:35)
James Griffin, Ph.D., Chief, Child Development and Behavior Branch, NICHD (3:12:24)
Adjourn
Sponsored by
The National Institute of Mental Health’s Division of Translational Research
The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
Disclaimer
We link to external websites for informational purposes only, but we do not endorse or guarantee their accuracy. Once you leave our site, you will be subject to the new website’s privacy policy. Read NIMH’s
full external linking policy
for more information.
NIMH Resources
Health Topics
Brochures and Fact Sheets
Contact Us
Información en español
Policies and Notices
Privacy Policy
Website Policies
FOIA
Accessibility
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
Federal Resources
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
NIH Virtual Tour
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
USA.gov
The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is part of NIH, a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Top