SOCIAL MEDIA,  
ONLINE SAFETY ,  
AND YOUTH  
MENTAL HEALTH
  
BEST PRACTICES AND RESOURCES  
FOR PARENTS AND CAREGIVERS  
Parents have a critical role in supporting the social and emotional 
development of their children. But other adults also play a key role 
in protecting children from unhealthy media use or risky exposure. 
A successful approach includes caregivers, pediatricians, teachers, 
coaches, and other trusted adults in a child’s life. 
The SAMHSA-funded National 
Center of Excellence on Social Media and Youth Mental Health  
(Center of Excellence) provides information and educational 
resources for youth, parents, educators, and others who help youth 
navigate social media. The Center of Excellence has developed a 
number of resources that provide timely guidance for youth on how 
to use digital media and manage their presence online. 
LET’S CHAT!  Parents and caregivers 
can engage in conversations with their 
children related to digital technology and 
social media use.
STRATEGIES 
FOR PARENTS AND CAREGIVERS 
1. Build a family media plan. 
2. Balance time with and without devices. 
3. Talk about social media. 
4. Set a good example. 
5. Optimize your family’s online experience. 

Conversation  
Starters for Families of 
Tweens and Teens
Having conversations with tweens and teens about technology and digital media can be 
challenging. For busy families, it can feel hard to find the right moment, or to say the right 
things. This resource provides ideas and examples that you, as parents and guardians, 
can use to frame conversations with your tweens and teens around common scenarios 
involving technology, social media, and video games. It is intended for use with tweens and 
teens who already are engaged with technology and digital media.
Below are questions and prompts that you can use with your child to get their input, make 
decisions together, and have conversations rather than lectures. It’s normal for parents to 
feel stressed during these conversations, so it is ok to pause or take some breaths if you 
need to, and remember not to jump in and try to control things. Having conversations “early 
and often” is preferable to planning and structuring one long talk. While there is no perfect 
time to have these discussions the table below gives some ideas for timing to consider and 
timing to avoid. 
Potential times  
for conversations
Times to avoid  
these conversations
•   When driving your child to or from 
activities and you have some alone 
time with them in the car
•   During a family dinner so other  
family members can be part of  
the discussion
•   During downtime at home 
•   After your child shared something 
that happened at school or with peers 
related to these topics
•   When there is a tight timeline or 
limited time for the conversations 
(e.g. When you have 10 minutes before 
the dentist appointment starts)
•   During or just after a conflict related 
to technology and digital media
•   When your child’s friends are around
These resources encourage parents and caregivers to have open and collaborative communication about their 
child’s online use and family expectations because children are more likely to follow rules when they have the 
opportunity to provide input and discuss their concerns about online safety. And close relationships between 
parents and their children are associated with fewer online risk-taking behaviors in children.  
• Normalize Having Boundaries: Talk about ways to prevent technology from 
crowding out healthy behaviors, such as sleep, and quality time with family, 
using developmentally appropriate language to help limit device and online 
platform use. 
• Pick Good Content: Ensure children are engaging with age-appropriate 
content with appropriate parental monitoring of media use, given the plethora 
of content available online. 
• Teach Non-screen Ways to Manage Emotions and Boredom: Devices are 
often used to manage stress or boredom, and finding appropriate alternatives 
is important to help limit online media use. 
• Parents Should Talk About Their Own Media Use: “I sometimes have a hard 
time not checking my phone or feeling the need to respond to texts or emails. 
I’m working on how to be better about my own boundaries. Let’s help each 
other find a good balance.” 
• “Sharenting”—Thinking Before You Share Content Online: Parents can think about how to appropriately 
share content on social media that includes their children, including sharing their pictures. Discussing this 
with children teaches them about consent and privacy, which may help them be a more responsible social 
media user as a teen and into adulthood. 
• Teach Safety Skills: When kids are young, we talk to them about street safety, swimming safety,  
and other rules that come with exploring the world. There are also safety rules for the digital world. 
• Checking in on Unwanted Content: As you probably know, your social media platforms track your search 
and viewing patterns. They try to get to know you, and an algorithm decides what to put in your feed. 
Parents can ask: “How is the algorithm working for you at this point? Is there content we don’t want to see? 
Can we look at ways to reset your algorithm?” Another aspect of social media use is protecting our privacy. 
“Have we looked at the privacy settings on all of your accounts? How are things going with those settings?” 
RESOURCES! For more information and additional SAMHSA resources, check out:  
Kids Online Health and Safety Task Force  
Parent and Caregiver Resources | SAMHSA
To learn how to get support for mental health, drug or alcohol issues, visit FindSupport.gov.  
If you or someone you know is struggling or in crisis, help is available. Call or text 988 or chat 
at 988lifeline.org.  
CONVERSATION STARTERS FOR FAMILIES: