Building Healthy  
Relationships with Media: 
Essential Skills for  
Children 10 and Younger 
Children build medi a habits and preferences from a very 
young age, so it’s worthwhile to set them up for a healthy 
relationship with  media  before they grow into teens 
and young adults. The following practical strategies are ways 
to build balance, critical thinking, self-regulation, and safety 
skills for toddlers through elementary school-aged children.
This handout was developed i n partnership with the Kid s Online Health and Safety Task 
Force, which is co-led by t he U.S. Department of Health and  Human Services, through 
the Substance Abuse and Me ntal Health Services Administrat ion, in close partnershi p 
with the U.S. Department of Commerce.
Funding for the Center of Exce llence was made possible by Grant No. SM087180 from 
SAMHSA of the U.S. Departme nt of Health and Human Servi ces (HHS). The contents 
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represe nt the official views of, nor an 
endorsement by, SAMHSA/HHS or the U.S. Government.

Do you ever find yourself arguing with your kids about screen time?  
You are not alone! Often, families’ discussions about screens feel like a power 
struggle, full of negotiations and negatives. But they don’t have to be. 
Screens are all around us, and help us work, laugh, learn, and escape from stress. 
Therefore, like you talk about food, sleep, school, or any other part of life, it’s 
important to find time to talk about media and technology. It can be anything from 
the latest movie or video game or something you hear about in the news. The key 
is to be open-minded, listen to our kids, and guide them without shame and blame. 
Even young kids can learn from conversations about online safety, how to recognize 
marketing, and being smart about what videos they watch. Children in elementary 
school may enjoy sharing their emerging opinions about technology. 
Ideas for how to do it:
•   Be an influencer detective (age 6+): If your child likes videos created by influencers, 
watch along with them and ask: “Why did they say that? Do you think someone paid 
them to put that in their video? Are they being real, or showing off? Do you think they 
get more ‘likes’ or earn more money that way?”
•   Family movie night (all ages): Pick a movie or show to watch together.  
Have conversations about the characters, what happened, and what you agree  
with and disagree with.
1.
Make it a Low-Drama Part of  
the Family Conversation 

Normalize Having Boundaries
Technology can’t take up every minute of our downtime. We need a good 
night’s sleep, time to talk to each other, and time to share food and laughs. Think about 
the family routines your family loves, whether it’s chatting on car rides, family meals, 
or dancing together, and make time for it. These are the things that we need to ensure 
tech doesn’t crowd out — for kids or parents. 
Ideas for how to do it:
•   No-phone zones (all ages): Together with your family, decide on rooms of your home or 
times of day when you don’t want technology to invade, such as at the dinner table, in the 
car, or before bedtime.
•   Quiet those devices (all ages): Set do not disturb, focus mode, or other settings on devices 
so that unnecessary notifications don’t come through when you want quiet time.
•   Device free meals (all ages): Families who decide there’s “no tech at the table” can focus 
more on each other, having conversations, and enjoying the food they are eating.
Things you can say:
•   Ages 2-3+:
-   Give a warning to help them transition away from screens, and help them come up 
with ideas for what to do next. “I’m going to set a timer for five more minutes, and 
then it will be time to do something else. What ideas do you have for what you want 
to play – maybe cars, playdoh, or stickers?”
-   “ Let’s do a challenge where you turn off the iPad/game console/TV by yourself, 
without me having to remind you. Do you think you can do that?” 
-   Help kids plan so that media doesn’t take up all of the day: “What’s your plan for 
using the iPad today? ” What’s your plan for doing other things too?”
-   “ I am going to put my phone away for the night so we can have time together.” 
•   Ages 5+:
-   “It seems like you’re having a hard time putting your device down, let’s talk about that.” 
-   “What makes you want to play that game every day?”
2.

There is so much content out there for kids! It’s your right to be choosy about 
what your kids watch and learn from. Pick videos, games, and movies with good 
storytelling and minimal marketing or ads. If you want something educational, go with 
shows that are proven to help kids learn, like Sesame Street or PBS KIDS. This helps 
kids understand that their minds can really engage with media — not just zone out.  
Ideas for how to do it:
•   Look it up (all ages): Common Sense Media rates thousands of movies, shows,  
apps, games, and books to let you know whether they are worth your child’s 
attention, are too mature, or contain themes you’d rather not introduce yet.
•   Peek in on what they are watching (all ages): Part of monitoring kids’ media use 
is watching along — even for just a few minutes. If you don’t like what they are 
watching, talk about it and find alternatives. 
Things you can say:
•  Ages 2-3+:
-   When you see them watching something new, ask:  
“What do you like about this?  
What happens on this show/game?”
-   “Can you show me your favorite channel?”
-   “ I’m not crazy about what that character just did. I thought it was rude.  
What do you think?”
3. Pick Good Content

During the COVID-19 pandemic, we all used media a little more to  
manage stress and boredom. But those habits don’t need to stick around.  
It’s a really important part of mental health to learn how to manage strong emotions 
and channel boredom into other activities that make us feel human. Many kids need 
to unwind and burn off a little steam when they come home from school, but make 
a time limit around technology so that this doesn’t take up the whole afternoon. 
Remember, managing emotions and boredom are skills that don’t come easily to  
all kids, so they need practice and help from caregivers.   
Ideas for how to do it/What to say: 
•   (Age 2+) Talk about emotions: “When you feel these big emotions, it’s okay. 
Emotions come and go. Let’s stretch our bodies reeeeeaaaaalllly big and take 5 
deep slow breaths. When we’re done, let’s see how we feel.” 
•   (Age 4+) Help build insight into how technology makes us feel. “How does your 
brain and body feel after playing that game?”
•   (All ages) Find alternatives: “Let’s try listening to some calm relaxing music” or 
“Instead of watching tv to go to bed, we are going to try reading a book. How about 
you pick out two books for us to read tonight?” 
•   (All ages) Recognize when your family is all sitting around looking at your own 
devices. “I’ve noticed that our family has been using our screens to help us calm 
down. Let’s talk about other ways we could calm down when we are stressed out.” 
Teach Non-Screen Ways to Manage  
Emotions and Boredom4.

We all see weird or upsetting stuff online sometimes. Talk about it in a  
non-judgmental way, so that your child knows it’s not their fault and they can come  
to you to process it.  When they do see something upsetting, empower them to pause, 
think about it, block it, and report it. Kids should know that kindness and respect is 
the expectation online, and rudeness or violence is not.    
Ideas for how to do it/What to say: 
•  (Ages 6+): 
-   “  I saw something rude in my social media feed today, and it made me upset.  
Does that ever happen to you?”
-   “ Do you ever see other kids being mean online/in your game?  
Why do you think they do that?”
Build Digital Smarts and Kindness5.

When kids are young, we talk to them about street safety,  
swimming safety, and other rules that come with exploring the world. 
Safety rules for the digital world should include:  
 1 ) privacy about names, addresses, phone numbers, and passwords,  
2) not chatting with strangers (who can sometimes pose as kids),  
3) not clicking links or downloading things that can carry viruses, and 
4)  unsafe websites that can show sexy or violent things. Kids can be impulsive  
and curious, so it’s important to teach them these rules ahead of time, before they 
stumble into trouble. Having kid-safe filters and protections on devices or  
Wi-Fi also helps.    
Ideas for how to do it/What to say: 
•  (Ages 3+): 
-   “ Just like I teach you how to be safe crossing the street, it’s my job to teach you 
how to be safe when using your tablet.”
•   (Ages 5+): 
-   “ You wouldn’t post your name and address on a billboard, right? That’s why  
we don’t share private information on a chat or game that anyone can see.”
-   “ Computer viruses can make our laptop/tablet crash and not work. That’s why  
I help you decide what websites to visit and games to download.”
-   “  If people online try to give you things, ask you for pictures or private information,  
or otherwise are making you feel weird, let me know and I can help you block them.”
6. Teach Safety Skills

Since the invention of social media, parents have shared billions of 
photos of their children online — often without kids’ permission.  
While these photos can share joy, parents say they also can lead to negative social 
comparisons about picture-perfect parenting. These photos also contain a lot of 
data about children’s faces and locations. Experts recommend asking for your kids’ 
permission before posting photos or stories about them online. This helps teach 
children about consent and privacy, which may help them be a more responsible 
social media user as a teen.   
Ideas for how to do it/What to say: 
•   (Ages 5+): If your child doesn’t like what you’ve posted, ask them why.  
Sometimes children are embarrassed or might want more of a say in what  
pictures you decide to post.
•   (All ages): If you post pictures of your child(ren) on social media, show them. 
Younger children may not understand who else can see these posts, so you might 
need to explain it, like “My account is public, so anyone can see this.” or “I only  
share pictures with my good friends and people like grandma.”
7. “Sharenting:” Thinking Before You Share

Family Movie 
Night
YouTube 
Together Time
Setting Up for 
Us Time
Technology 
That’s Hard to 
Put Down
Suggested Activities
Print and try some of these fun skill-building  activities with your kids!

Family Movie Night
Plan a family movie night. You can have your 
child pick something or watch something you 
loved from your childhood. Or, if your child likes 
to watch a streaming series, ask to join them 
for an episode or two. Resist picking up your 
phone! Ask your child 1) what they like about 
the movie/show and characters. 2) What they 
think is going to happen next in the plot.  
3) How does the movie/show make them feel
(happ
y/sad/excited/nervous/etc.)
YouTube Together Time
Watch a YouTube video together (can be 
anything you find appropriate or perhaps 
your child’s favorite channel). Talk about the 
ads that pop up and what they mean. Talk 
about the recommended videos that show 
up, encourage appropriate choices, and see 
what your child wants to click on. Talk to them 
about what you think is appropriate video 
c
ontent, and what is not.
Setting Up for Us Time
Set up device free dinners or device free zones 
and designate a basket or box where devices 
go to be quiet for a while. If you feel like being 
crafty, make the bag or box and have your child 
help make or decorate it. When your devices are 
in there, communicate that you are doing this 
so you can focus just on them and the things 
you want to do or play together. 
Technology That's 
Hard to Put Down
Take turns looking at your ‘screen time’ output 
and talk about what you usually do on your 
device and whether it brings you joy or stress. 
Ask kids which apps and games are hardest 
to put down, and which ones let them have 
boundaries or allow them to feel like they are 
easily in control.
Suggested Activities
Print and try some of these fun skill-building  activities with your kids!

How We Manage 
Emotions
How Technology 
Makes Us Feel
Our Non-Tech 
Favorites
Choosing the 
Good Stuff 
Suggested Activities

Our Non-Tech Favorites
Pick a board game you want to play, song you 
want to dance to, art activity that makes you 
feel good, outdoor place you want to visit, or 
pet you want to snuggle. Each family’s non-
tech favorites are different, so find a few that 
work for you and make them a regular routine. 
Write them down here: 
Choosing the Good Stuff
Talk with your child about what type of channels/
shows they watch or what digital games they play. 
Play a quiz game where you rate each video or 
gam
e on a scale of 1 to 5 on qualities like: 
•  I use my brain when I watch this (vs. My brain
turns off wh
en I watch this)
• The people are kind (vs. The people are rude)
•  I feel good about myself when I watch this 
(vs. I f
eel worse about myself when I watch this)
• This feels like our family (vs. This feels unrealistic)
How We Manage Emotions
What’s your family’s emotion coping plan? How 
do you each like to deal with stress or upsetting 
feelings? Find healthy ways to cope that feel 
right for your family, like movement (stretching, 
taking a walk), using your senses (music, 
hugging, stress putty), deep breathing, or 
talking about your feelings without yelling. Write 
down your coping plan here: 
How Technology Makes Us Feel
Both parents and kids, think about what apps or 
games you use the most. How do they make you 
feel 
during and after using them? Good? Cranky? 
Riled up? Worried? Maybe take a break from the 
ones that don’t make you feel good. 
Suggested Activities

Scam Finder
Pop-up Ad 
Whackamole
Digital 
Disengage 
Challenge
Weird or 
Creepy Content
Suggested Activities

Digital Disengage Challenge
This is a family challenge to put your devices 
down! It’s hard to pull your attention away, but 
make a plan to turn it off, hand over the device, 
or put it away when it’s time to do something 
else. Count up points when family members 
can put their device down the first time 
someone asks them. The person with the most 
self-control points at the end of the week wins! 
Weird or Creepy Content
Ask your child to tell you about the weirdest or 
creepiest thing that they’ve seen online lately. 
Don’t overreact! Help them understand what 
it was, why it showed up, and how to avoid it 
n
ext time.
Scam Finder
Talk about the types of scams you’ve seen 
lately. Spam phone calls? T
oo-good-to-be-
true advertisements? An influencer saying 
something outlandish?  This helps your child 
build a critical eye.
Pop-up Ad Whackamole
If your child is watching videos or playing a 
mobile game, teach them to close, “X” or “skip” 
the ad, and to let you know when they did it! 
Have them help you 
figure out which apps 
or games have the most annoying pop-ups, 
uninstall them, and 
find fun alternatives.
Suggested Activities

To Post or 
Not to Post 
Offline Family 
Photo Album 
Private vs. 
Shareable
Chat Etiquette
Suggested Activities
Visit AAP.org/socialmedia

Private vs. Shareable
Quiz your child on what is private versus what 
is OK to be shared. Their last name? Address? 
School name? Phone number? Home town? 
Password? All private! Their high score? 
Favorite game? OK to share!
Chat Etiquette
If your child uses a video game or video 
platform that allows chatting and comments, 
have them show you what it looks like. Look at 
the chat together and talk about: who is being 
respectful and positive? Who isn’t? How do 
they know that other players are really kids? 
Help them restrict their chat to “friends” online, 
or try turning off the chat for a week or 2 — 
some kids don’t miss it.
To Post or Not to Post
Do you regularly post photos of your children? If so, 
sit down with them on the couch and go through your 
social media feed with them. Ask them to rate your 
p
osts — from recent to when they were just babies — 
with on
e of three responses:
• I love that you shared it!
• Meh, don’t really care.
•  I kinda wish you hadn’t....
You don’t need to necessarily take photos down but listen 
to your kids with an open mind about why they wish those 
photos stayed on your phone, and not on the internet.
Offline Family Photo Album
Instead of posting photos online, select a few 
that are special to your family to print out and 
put in an album in your home. Have your children 
help pick out the ones that give them the best 
memories and help arrange their order in the 
album. Keep the album in an easy-to-reach 
place so that kids can look through it during 
downtime (rather than grabbing a device!).
Suggested Activities
Visit AAP.org/socialmedia