Online lives, offline consequences
Skip to main content
Global
Regions
WHO Regional websites
Africa
Americas
South-East Asia
Europe
Eastern Mediterranean
Western Pacific
Countries
Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czechia
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands (Kingdom of the)
North Macedonia
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Republic of Moldova
Romania
Russian Federation
San Marino
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Tajikistan
Türkiye
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Uzbekistan
When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select.
Select language
Select language
English
Français
Русский
Deutsch
Europe
Home
Health topics
All topics
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
Resources
Fact sheets
Feature stories
Multimedia
Publications
Questions & answers
Tools and toolkits
Popular
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
Ukraine emergency
Nutrition
Environment and health
Mpox (monkeypox)
Our work
Our work
Publications
Tools and toolkits
Campaigns
Activities
Calls for experts
Initiatives
Policies
Second European Programme of Work
One health
Sustainable Development Goals
Flagship initiatives
Core priorities
Moving towards UHC
Protecting against health emergencies
Promoting health and well-being
Newsroom
Newsroom
News stories
Media releases
Statements
Feature stories
Photo stories
Podcasts
Fact sheets
Questions and answers
Media Contacts
Headlines
Campaigns
Events
Multimedia
Newsletters
Quizzes
Spotlights
Data
Data at WHO/Europe
Overview
European Health Information Gateway
European health report
Core health indicators
European Immunization Agenda 2030 dashboard​
Noncommunicable diseases (NCD) dashboard
Highlights
News
Events
Publications
About us
Teams
Data and digital health
Policy & Governance f. Health through the Life Course
Groups and networks
EVIPNet
Health Evidence Network (HEN)
The European Health Report 2024
Emergencies
Focus on
Conflict in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory
Climate crisis: extreme weather
Mpox
Ukraine emergency
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
Our work in emergencies
About health emergencies
Health emergencies newsletter
WHO European Region Health Security Bulletin
Health emergencies in the Region
Health emergencies list
Ukraine emergency
About us
About WHO Europe
Regional Director
Executive Council
Organigram
Technical centres
Teams
Faces of WHO
Governance
Regional Committee for Europe
Standing Committee
Partnerships
Partnerships
Groups and networks
WHO collaborating centres
Second European Programme of Work
Home
/
News
/
item
/
Online lives, offline consequences
WHO
©
Credits
Online lives, offline consequences
WHO/Europe urges coordinated action to protect youth mental health in new policy brief
23 May 2025
Media release
Reading time:
Copenhagen, 23 May 2025
The digital environment, from social media to AI-driven platforms, is a documented risk to the mental health of children and adolescents in the WHO European Region – but countries can already work to protect them. That is the overarching conclusion in a new policy brief developed by WHO/Europe, together with the Polish Ministry of Health and the Digital Transformations for Health Lab (DTH-Lab).
The policy brief, titled “Addressing the digital determinants of youth mental health”, combines a review of current evidence and policies with a call for governments, industry and civil society to take immediate action to make digital spaces safer, healthier and more equitable for young people.
“Young people’s mental health is being shaped by digital spaces just as much as by schools or families – but without the same protections,” said Dr Hans Henri P. Kluge, WHO Regional Director for Europe. “As digital platforms increasingly shape the lives of our youth, we must ensure they are also protecting their mental health – not harming it. We are calling on governments, industry and communities to step up and create digital environments that nurture, rather than neglect, the well-being of our youngest generations. This requires coordinated action – from improving youth digital literacy to stronger regulation of digital platforms to supporting youth-led digital design and governance. Our children and young people deserve to be protected from potential digital harms.”
Key findings
Technology use affects youth mental health in complex and contradictory ways – with both positive and harmful outcomes.
Experiencing offline risks and vulnerabilities due to an existing mental health condition, being part of a marginalized group or based on their gender, makes young people more likely to be impacted by online risks.
Exposure to cyberbullying, unrealistic body standards, self-harm content and harmful marketing is widespread and under-regulated.
Inappropriate data governance and algorithm-driven platforms amplify risks, particularly when there is no transparency or youth consent.
Many national policies place the burden of safety on parents and children, while industry accountability and youth participation remain limited.
No consensus on who is responsible
One of the key findings of the analysis of national policies from 42 countries, as well as European Union (EU)-level regulatory frameworks, indicated that while action is being taken, there is little consensus on who should take responsibility.
Some countries, like Azerbaijan, Italy and Spain, put emphasis on parental controls, whereas others, like Croatia and Germany, have put age-labelling into regulatory frameworks. Still others, including France, Ireland and the United Kingdom, focus on holding social media and digital platforms accountable.
Although policy to protect young people online is proliferating, the analysis found that young people and the health sector are rarely consulted in the development of those policies.
“We need to adopt policies and regulations that are targeted, enforceable and informed by evidence,” says Dr Natasha Azzopardi-Muscat, Director of the Division of Country Health Policies and Systems at WHO/Europe. “And importantly, ensuring young people participate in shaping these developments will allow countries to create policies that actually have impact, because they fit young people’s needs and preferences.”
The report also invokes the precautionary principle, urging governments to shift the burden of proof from proving harm to proving safety.
“Our review of the latest evidence on children’s technology use and mental health outcomes highlights the presence of multiple online risks,” says Ilona Kickbusch, the Director of DTH-Lab. “While not all young people are impacted in the same way, there are clearly features of social media and other platforms that have been designed to put profit ahead of young people’s well-being. Creating safe and healthy online environments, and protecting young people from digital harms, must be urgent public health priorities for all countries. Young people’s online experiences are now an important determinant of their health and we have a collective responsibility to ensure these experiences are positive ones.”
Urgent policy actions
WHO/Europe is calling on countries to prioritize 8 urgent policy actions:
making digital well-being a national public health priority
regulating platform design to limit addictive and harmful features
empowering health workers to guide safe tech use
supporting youth-led digital governance
increasing investment in offline alternatives to screen-based entertainment
applying proven, intersectoral public health strategies to improve digital well-being
developing clear guidance on digital well-being and healthy technology use
holding industry and commercial interests to account.
“In today’s digital world, we must find a balance between the benefits of technology and its impact on the mental health of the younger generation. This is a new challenge for all EU member states,” said Polish Deputy Minister of Health, Katarzyna Kacperczyk, speaking at an international meeting on youth mental health and digitalization hosted by Poland under the Polish Presidency of the Council of the EU on 7 May this year.
Young people in the European Region agree. Catalina Popoviciu of Romania, has a fitting metaphor for striking this balance: “Social media is like a car: it can take you from point A to point B, it can take you from isolation to connection, but we need the instruction manual, the seatbelt, and a clear understanding of the driving rules and speed limits to ensure we drive responsibly and safely”.
Media Contacts
WHO/Europe Press Office
Email:
eupress@who.int
Jason Maurer
Communications Consultant
WHO Regional Office for Europe
Email:
maurerj@who.int
Related
Addressing the digital determinants of youth mental health and well-being: policy brief
Digital health
Mental health
Child and adolescent health
Quick links
Media centre
Emergencies
About us
Second European Programme of Work
Publications
Campaigns
Help
Contact us
Careers
Cyber security
Privacy
Frequently asked questions
Subscribe to our newsletters
Privacy Legal Notice
©
2026
WHO